Cricket
This article is about the sport. For the insect, see Cricket
(insect). For other uses, see Cricket (disambiguation).
“Cricketer” redirects here. For other uses, see Cricketer
(disambiguation).
Cricket is a batandball game played between two teams
of 11 players each on a ﬁeld at the centre of which is a
rectangular 22yard long pitch. Each team takes its turn
to bat, attempting to score runs, while the other team
ﬁelds. Each turn is known as an innings.
The bowler delivers the ball to the batsman who attempts
to hit the ball with his bat away from the ﬁelders so he
can run to the other end of the pitch and score a run.
Each batsman continues batting until he is out. The batting team continues batting until ten batsmen are out, or a
speciﬁed number of overs of six balls have been bowled,
at which point the teams switch roles and the ﬁelding team
comes in to bat.
In professional cricket the length of a game ranges from
20 overs per side to Test cricket played over ﬁve days.
The Laws of Cricket are maintained by the International
Cricket Council (ICC) and the Marylebone Cricket Club
(MCC) with additional Standard Playing Conditions for
Test matches and One Day Internationals.[1]
Cricket was ﬁrst played in southern England in the 16th
century. By the end of the 18th century, it had developed
to be the national sport of England. The expansion of the
British Empire led to cricket being played overseas and
by the mid19th century the ﬁrst international match was
held. ICC, the game’s governing body, has 10 full members.[2] The game ismost popular in Australasia, England,
the Indian subcontinent, the West Indies and Southern
Africa.
1 History
Main article: History of cricket
Early cricket was at some time or another described as
“a club striking a ball (like) the ancient games of clubball, stoolball, trapball, stobball”.[3] Cricket can deﬁnitely be traced back to Tudor times in early 16thcentury
England. Written evidence exists of a game known as
creag being played by Prince Edward, the son of Edward
I (Longshanks), at Newenden, Kent in 1301[4] and there
has been speculation, but no evidence, that this was a
form of cricket.
A number of other words have been suggested as sources
for the term “cricket”. In the earliest deﬁnite reference to the sport in 1598,[5] it is called creckett. Given
the strong medieval trade connections between southeast
England and the County of Flanders when the latter belonged to the Duchy of Burgundy, the name may have
been derived from the Middle Dutch[6] krick(e), meaning a stick (crook); or the Old English cricc or cryce
meaning a crutch or staﬀ.[7] In Old French, the word
criquet seems to have meant a kind of club or stick.[8]
In Samuel Johnson's Dictionary, he derived cricket from
"cryce, Saxon, a stick”.[9] Another possible source is the
Middle Dutch word krickstoel, meaning a long low stool
used for kneeling in church and which resembled the
long low wicket with two stumps used in early cricket.[10]
According to Heiner Gillmeister, a European language
expert of Bonn University, “cricket” derives from the
Middle Dutch phrase for hockey, met de (krik ket)sen
(i.e., “with the stick chase”).[11] Dr Gillmeister believes
that not only the name but the sport itself is of Flemish
origin.[12]
The earliest deﬁnite reference to cricket being played in
England (and hence anywhere) is in evidence given at
a 1598 court case which mentions that “creckett” was
played on common land in Guildford, Surrey, around
1550. The court in Guildford heard on Monday, 17 January 1597 (Julian date, equating to the year 1598 in the
Gregorian calendar) from a 59yearold coroner, John
Derrick, who gave witness that when he was a scholar at
the “Free School at Guildford”, ﬁfty years earlier, “hee
and diverse of his fellows did runne and play [on the
common land] at creckett and other plaies.”[13][14] It is
believed that it was originally a children’s game but references around 1610[14] indicate that adults had started
playing it and the earliest reference to interparish or
village cricket occurs soon afterwards. In 1624, a player
called Jasper Vinall was killed when he was struck on
the head during a match between two parish teams in
Sussex.[15]
During the 17th century, numerous references indicate
the growth of cricket in the southeast of England. By
the end of the century, it had become an organised activity being played for high stakes and it is believed that
the ﬁrst professionals appeared in the years following the
Restoration in 1660. A newspaper report survives of “a
great cricket match” with eleven players a side that was
played for high stakes in Sussex in 1697, and this is the
earliest known reference to a cricket match of such importance.
1
2 1 HISTORY
Francis Cotes, The Young Cricketer, 1768
The game underwent major development in the 18th century and became the national sport of England. Betting
played a major part in that development with rich patrons
forming their own “select XIs”. Cricket was prominent
in London as early as 1707 and large crowds ﬂocked to
matches on the Artillery Ground in Finsbury. The single
wicket form of the sport attracted huge crowds and wagers to match. In the 1730s Frederick Prince of Wales
played a major role in developing the sport.[16] Bowling
evolved around 1760 when bowlers began to pitch the
ball instead of rolling or skimming it towards the batsman. This caused a revolution in bat design because, to
deal with the bouncing ball, it was necessary to introduce
the modern straight bat in place of the old “hockey stick”
shape. The Hambledon Club was founded in the 1760s
and, for the next 20 years until the formation of MCC
and the opening of Lord’s Old Ground in 1787, Hambledon was both the game’s greatest club and its focal point.
MCC quickly became the sport’s premier club and the
custodian of the Laws of Cricket. New Laws introduced
in the latter part of the 18th century included the three
stump wicket and leg before wicket (lbw).
The 19th century saw underarm bowling replaced by ﬁrst
roundarm and then overarm bowling. Both developments
were controversial. Organisation of the game at county
level led to the creation of the county clubs, starting with
Sussex CCC in 1839, which ultimately formed the ofﬁcial County Championship in 1890. Meanwhile, the
British Empire had been instrumental in spreading the
game overseas and by the middle of the 19th century it
had become well established in India, North America, the
Caribbean, South Africa, Australia and New Zealand. In
1844, the ﬁrst international cricket match took place between the United States and Canada (although neither has
ever been ranked as a Testplaying nation).
The ﬁrst English team to tour overseas, on board ship to North
America, 1859
In 1859, a team of England players went on the ﬁrst
overseas tour (to North America). The ﬁrst Australian
team to tour overseas was a team of Aboriginal stockmen
who travelled to England in 1868 to play matches against
county teams.[17] In 1862, an English team made the ﬁrst
tour of Australia and in 1876–77, an England team took
part in the ﬁrstever Test match at the Melbourne Cricket
Ground against Australia.
W.G. Grace started his long career in 1865; his career is
often said to have revolutionised the sport.[18] The rivalry
between England and Australia gave birth to The Ashes
in 1882 and this has remained Test cricket’s most famous
contest . Test cricket began to expand in 1888–89 when
South Africa played England. The last two decades before the First World War have been called the "Golden
Age of cricket". It is a nostalgic name prompted by the
collective sense of loss resulting from the war, but the
period did produce some great players and memorable
matches, especially as organised competition at county
and Test level developed.
The interwar years were dominated by one player: Australia’s Don Bradman, statistically the greatest batsman
of all time. It was the determination of the England
team to overcome his skill that brought about the infamous Bodyline series in 1932–33, particularly from the
accurate shortpitched bowling of Harold Larwood. Test
cricket continued to expand during the 20th century with
the addition of the West Indies, India, and New Zealand
before the Second World War and then Pakistan, Sri
Lanka, and Bangladesh in the postwar period. However,
South Africa was banned from international cricket from
1970 to 1992 because of its government’s apartheid pol2.1 Format of the game 3
Don Bradman of Australia had a Test average of 99.94 and an
overall ﬁrstclass average of 95.14, records unmatched by any
other player.[19]
icy.
Cricket entered a new era in 1963 when English counties introduced the limited overs variant. As it was sure
to produce a result, limited overs cricket was lucrative
and the number of matches increased. The ﬁrst Limited
Overs International was played in 1971. The governing
International Cricket Council (ICC) saw its potential and
staged the ﬁrst limited overs Cricket World Cup in 1975.
In the 21st century, a new limited overs form, Twenty20,
has made an immediate impact.
2 Rules and gameplay
Main article: Laws of cricket
Cricket is a bat and ball game, played between two teams
of eleven players each.[20][21] One team bats, attempting
to score runs, while the other bowls and ﬁelds the ball,
attempting to restrict the scoring and dismiss the batsmen.
The objective of the game is for a team to score more runs
than its opponent. In some forms of cricket, it may also
be necessary to dismiss the opposition in order to win the
match, which would otherwise be drawn.
There are separate leagues for Women’s cricket, though
informal matches may have mixed teams.
2.1 Format of the game
A cricket match is divided into periods called innings
(which ends with “s” in both singular and plural form). It
is decided before the match whether the teams will have
one innings or two innings each. During an innings one
team ﬁelds and the other bats. The two teams switch between ﬁelding and batting after each innings. All eleven
members of the ﬁelding team take the ﬁeld, but only two
members of the batting team (two batsmen) are on the
ﬁeld at any given time. The order of batsmen is usually
announced just before the match, but it can be varied.
A coin toss is held by the team captains (who are also
players) just before the match starts: the winner decides
whether to bat or ﬁeld ﬁrst.
The cricket ﬁeld is usually oval in shape, with a rectangular pitch at the center. The edge of the playing ﬁeld is
marked with a boundary, which could be a fence, part of
the stands, a rope or a painted line.
At each end of the pitch is a wooden target called awicket,
placed 22 yards apart. The pitch is marked with painted
lines: a bowling crease in line with the wicket, and a batting or popping crease four feet in front of it. The wicket
is made of three vertical stumps supporting two small horizontal bails. A wicket is put down if at least one bail is
dislodged, or one stump is knocked down (usually by the
ball, but also if the batsman does it with his body, clothing
or equipment). This is also described as breaking, knocking down, or hitting the wicket – though if the ball hits the
wicket but does not dislodge a bail or stump then it is not
down.
At any instant each batsman owns a particular wicket
(usually the one closer to him) and, except when actually
batting, is safe when he is in his ground. This means that
at least one part of his body or bat is touching the ground
behind the popping crease. If hiswicket is put down while
the ball is live and he is out of his ground then he is dismissed, but the other batsman is safe.[22]
4 2 RULES AND GAMEPLAY
A ball being bowled. From back to front - umpire (with
hat), wicket, nonstriking batsman (yellow), bowler
(blue), ball, pitch, crease, striking batsman (yellow),
wicket, wicket keeper (blue,crouching) and ﬁelder (blue,
slip position)
The two batsmen take positions at opposite ends of the
pitch. One designated member of the ﬁelding team,
called the bowler, bowls the ball from one end of the pitch
to the striking batsman at the other end. The batsman at
the bowling end is called the nonstriker, and stands to the
side of his wicket, behind his crease. The batsman are allowed to step forward of their creases, though at some
risk. Another member of the ﬁelding team, the wicket
keeper, is positioned behind the striker’s wicket.
The ﬁelding team’s other nine members stand outside the
pitch, spread out across the ﬁeld. The ﬁelding captain
often strategically changes their position between balls.
There is always an umpire at each end of the pitch.
The bowler usually retreats a few yards (metres) behind
the wicket, runs towards it (his runup), and then releases
the ball overhand as he reaches the bowling crease. (If
he crosses the crease before he releases the ball, or if he
ﬂexes his elbow too much in a throw, then it is a no ball,
and the batting team gets a penalty or extra run. If the ball
passes the far wicket out of reach of the batsman then it
is called a wide, also with an extra run.) The ball can be
bowled so that it bounces on the pitch, lands exactly on the
crease (a yorker), or crosses the crease without bouncing
(a full toss).
The batsman tries to prevent the ball from hitting the
wicket by striking the ball with his bat. (This includes
the handle of the bat, and his gloves.) If the bowler succeeds in putting down the wicket the batsman is dismissed
and is said to be bowled out. If the batsman misses the
ball, but any part of his body prevents it from reaching
the wicket, then he is out leg before wicket, or “LBW”.
If the batsman hits the ball but it is caught by a ﬁelder
without bouncing then he is caught out. If it is caught by
the bowler then he is caught and bowled; by the wicket
keeper, caught behind.
If the batsman is successful in striking the ball and it is not
caught without bouncing, then the two batsmen may try
to score points (runs) for their team. Both batsmen run
the length of the pitch, exchanging positions, and grounding their bats behind the opposite crease. Each crossing
and grounding by both batsmen is worth one run. The
batsmen may attempt one run, multiple runs, or elect not
to run at all. By attempting runs, the batsmen risk dismissal. This happens if the ﬁelding team retrieves the
ball and hits either wicket with the ball (either by throwing it, or while holding it) before the batsman who owns
that wicket reaches his ground behind the crease. The
dismissed batsman is run out. Batsmen will sometimes
start to run, change their mind, and return to their original positions.
If the batsman hits the ball over the ﬁeld boundary without the ball touching the ﬁeld, the batting team scores six
runs. If the ball touches the ground and then reaches the
boundary, the batting team scores four runs. The batsmen
might start running before the ball reaches the boundary,
but those runs don't count.
If the batsman misses the ball they can still attempt extra
runs : these are called byes. If the ball bounces oﬀ his
body then it is called a leg bye.
If the striking batsman leaves his ground and misses the
ball, then the wicket keeper can catch it and put down the
wicket - stumped.
In case of a no ball or a wide the batsman can choose
to strike the ball, earning runs in addition to the ﬁxed
penalty. If he does so he can only be dismissed by being run out.
When the batsmen have ﬁnished attempting their runs the
ball is dead, and is returned to the bowler to be bowled
again. The ball becomes live when he starts his run up.
The bowler continues to bowl toward the same wicket,
regardless of any switch of the batsmen’s positions.[23]
A batsman may retire from an innings without being dismissed, usually after reaching a milestone like a hundred
runs (a century).
A dismissed batsman leaves the ﬁeld, to be replaced by
another batsman from the batting team. However, even
though the wicket may have been put down, or the ball
caught, the batsman is not actually dismissed until the
ﬁelding team appeal to the umpires for a decision, traditionally using the expression “How’s that” (or “Howzat”).
2.2 Pitch, wickets and creases 5
In some matches, particularly test matches, either team
may request a review by a third umpire who can use a Decision Review System (DRS), which includes TV replays
and other electronic equipment such as hawk eye, hotspot
and the snickometer.
After a bowler has bowled six times (an over), another
member of the ﬁelding team is designated as the new
bowler, the old bowler taking up a ﬁelding position. The
batsmen stay in place, and the new bowler bowls to the
opposite wicket, so the role of striker and nonstriker reverse. The wicket keeper and the two umpires always
change positions, as domany of the ﬁelders, and play continues. Fielding team members may bowl multiple times
during an innings, but may not bowl two overs in succession.
The innings is complete when 10 of the 11 members of
the batting team have been dismissed (all out – although
one always remaining “not out”), when a set number of
overs has been played, or when the batting team declares
that they have enough runs.
The number of innings and the number of overs per innings vary depending on the format of the match. In a
match which is not a limited overs format the umpires will
usually specify that the last session of the last innings will
have a speciﬁed number of overs.
The match always ends when all innings have been completed. The umpires can also call an end to the match
in case of bad light or weather. But in many cases the
match ends immediately when the ﬁrst team to bat has
played all of its innings, and the last team to bat has more
runs. In fourinnings games the last team may not even
need to play its second innings: this team is said towin by
an innings. If this winning team has not completed its last
innings, and still has, for example, ﬁve batsmen who are
not out or have not even batted, then they are said to “win
by ﬁve wickets”. If the last team to bat is losing, is all
out, and has 10 fewer runs than the other team, then the
winning team “wins by 10 runs”. If the two teams both
play all their innings and they have the same number of
runs, then it is a tie.
In fourinnings matches there is also the possibility of a
draw: the team with fewer runs still has batsmen on the
ﬁeld when the game ends. This has a major eﬀect on
strategy: a team will often declare an innings when they
have accumulated enough runs, in the hope that they will
have enough time left to dismiss the other team and thus
avoid a draw, but risking a loss if the other team scores
enough runs.
2.2 Pitch, wickets and creases
Main articles: Cricket pitch, Wicket and Crease (cricket)
See also: Stump (cricket) and Bail (cricket)
2.2.1 Playing surface
Outﬁeld
Inﬁeld
CloseInﬁeld
Sightscreen
Pitch
Backward
Forward
Squarer
Longer
Sillier
Shorter
Deeper
Onside (R)
Oﬀside (L)
Oﬀside (R)
Onside (L)
C
ir
cl
e:
3
0 ya
rd
s (2
7.
4 m
)
15 yards (13.7 m)
Bo
un
da
ry
Straight
Wider Finer Wider
A typical cricket ﬁeld.
Cricket is played on a grassy ﬁeld.[24] The Laws of Cricket
do not specify the size or shape of the ﬁeld,[25] but it is
often oval. In the centre of the ﬁeld is a rectangular strip,
known as the pitch.[24]
The pitch is a ﬂat surface 10 feet (3.0 m) wide, with
very short grass that tends to be worn away as the game
progresses.[26] At either end of the pitch, 22 yards (20 m)
apart, are placed wooden targets, known as the wickets.
These serve as a target for the bowling (also known as the
ﬁelding) side and are defended by the batting side, which
seeks to accumulate runs.
2.2.2 Stumps, bails and creases
Each wicket on the pitch consists of three wooden stumps
placed vertically, in line with one another. They are surmounted by two wooden crosspieces called bails; the total height of the wicket including bails is 28.5 inches (720
mm) and the combined width of the three stumps, including small gaps between them is 9 inches (230 mm).
Four lines, known as creases, are painted onto the pitch
around the wicket areas to deﬁne the batsman’s “safe territory” and to determine the limit of the bowler’s approach. These are called the “popping” (or batting)
crease, the bowling crease and two “return” creases.
The stumps are placed in line on the bowling creases and
so these creasesmust be 22 yards (20m) apart. A bowling
crease is 8 feet 8 inches (2.64 m) long, with the middle
stump placed dead centre. The popping crease has the
same length, is parallel to the bowling crease and is 4 feet
(1.2 m) in front of the wicket. The return creases are perpendicular to the other two; they are adjoined to the ends
6 2 RULES AND GAMEPLAY
STUMPS
A wicket consists of three stumps that are hammered into the
ground, and topped with two bails.
of the popping crease and are drawn through the ends of
the bowling crease to a length of at least 8 feet (2.4 m).
When bowling the ball, the bowler’s back foot in his “delivery stride” must land within the two return creases
while at least some part of his front foot must land on
or behind the popping crease. If the bowler breaks this
rule, the umpire calls "No ball".
The importance of the popping crease to the batsman is
that it marks the limit of his safe territory. He can be
dismissed stumped or run out (see Dismissals below) if
the wicket is broken while he is “out of his ground”.
2.3 Bat and ball
Main articles: Cricket bat and Cricket ball
Two diﬀerent types of cricket balls:
i) A used white ball. White balls are mainly utilised
in limited overs cricket, especially in matches played at
night, under ﬂoodlights (left).
ii) A used red ball, Red balls are utilised in Test cricket
and ﬁrstclass cricket and some other forms of cricket
(right).
NB Both balls are the same size.
The essence of the sport is that a bowler delivers the ball
from his end of the pitch towards the batsmanwho, armed
with a bat is “on strike” at the other end.
The bat is made of wood (usually White Willow) and has
the shape of a blade topped by a cylindrical handle. The
blade must not be more than 4.25 inches (108 mm) wide
and the total length of the bat not more than 38 inches
(970 mm).
The ball is a hard leatherseamed spheroid, with a circumference of 9 inches (230 mm). The hardness of the ball,
which can be delivered at speeds of more than 90 miles
per hour (140 km/h), is a matter for concern and batsmen wear protective clothing including pads (designed to
protect the knees and shins), batting gloves for the hands,
a helmet for the head and a box inside the trousers (to
protect the crotch area). Some batsmen wear additional
padding inside their shirts and trousers such as thigh pads,
arm pads, rib protectors and shoulder pads. The ball has
a “seam": six rows of stitches attaching the leather shell
of the ball to the string and cork interior. The seam on
a new ball is prominent, and helps the bowler propel it
in a less predictable manner. During cricket matches, the
quality of the ball changes to a point where it is no longer
usable, and during this decline its properties alter and thus
inﬂuence the match.
2.4 Umpires and scorers
Main articles: Umpire (cricket) and Scorer
The game on the ﬁeld is regulated by two umpires, one
of whom stands behind the wicket at the bowler’s end, the
other in a position called “square leg”, a position 15–20
metres to the side of the “on strike” batsman. The main
role of the umpires is to adjudicate on whether a ball is
correctly bowled (not a no ball or a wide), when a run
is scored, and whether a batsman is out (the ﬁelding side
must appeal to the umpire, usually with the phrase How’s
2.6 Overs 7
An umpire
That?). Umpires also determine when intervals start and
end, decide on the suitability of the playing conditions
and can interrupt or even abandon the match due to circumstances likely to endanger the players, such as a damp
pitch or deterioration of the light.
Oﬀ the ﬁeld and in televised matches, there is often a
third umpire who can make decisions on certain incidents with the aid of video evidence. The third umpire is
mandatory under the playing conditions for Test matches
and limited overs internationals played between two ICC
full members. These matches also have a match referee
whose job is to ensure that play is within the Laws of
cricket and the spirit of the game.
The match details, including runs and dismissals, are
recorded by two oﬃcial scorers, one representing each
team. The scorers are directed by the hand signals of an
umpire. For example, the umpire raises a foreﬁnger to
signal that the batsman is out (has been dismissed); he
raises both arms above his head if the batsman has hit the
ball for six runs. The scorers are required by the Laws of
cricket to record all runs scored, wickets taken and overs
bowled; in practice, they also note signiﬁcant amounts of
additional data relating to the game.
2.5 Innings
The innings (ending with 's’ in both singular and plural
form) is the term used for the collective performance of
the batting side.[27] In theory, all eleven members of the
batting side take a turn to bat but, for various reasons, an
innings can end before they all do so. Depending on the
type of match being played, each team has one or two
innings apiece.
The main aim of the bowler, supported by his ﬁelders,
is to dismiss the batsman. A batsman when dismissed is
said to be “out” and that means he must leave the ﬁeld
of play and be replaced by the next batsman on his team.
When ten batsmen have been dismissed (i.e., are out),
then the whole team is dismissed and the innings is over.
The last batsman, the one who has not been dismissed, is
not allowed to continue alone as there must always be two
batsmen “in”. This batsman is termed “not out”.
An innings can end early for three reasons: because the
batting side’s captain has chosen to “declare” the innings
closed (which is a tactical decision), or because the batting side has achieved its target and won the game, or because the game has ended prematurely due to bad weather
or running out of time. In each of these cases the team’s
innings ends with two “not out” batsmen, unless the innings is declared closed at the fall of a wicket and the
next batsman has not joined in the play.
In limited overs cricket, there might be two batsmen still
“not out” when the last of the allotted overs has been
bowled.
2.6 Overs
Main article: Over (cricket)
The bowler bowls the ball in sets of six deliveries (or
“balls”) and each set of six balls is called an over. This
name came about because the umpire calls “Over!" when
six balls have been bowled. At this point, another bowler
is deployed at the other end, and the ﬁelding side changes
ends while the batsmen do not. A bowler cannot bowl two
successive overs, although a bowler can bowl unchanged
at the same end for several overs. The batsmen do not
change ends and so the one who was nonstriker is now
the striker and viceversa. The umpires also change positions so that the one who was at square leg now stands
behind the wicket at the nonstriker’s end and viceversa.
2.7 Team structure
A team consists of eleven players. Depending on his or
her primary skills, a player may be classiﬁed as a specialist batsman or bowler. A wellbalanced team usually
has ﬁve or six specialist batsmen and four or ﬁve specialist
bowlers. Teams nearly always include a specialist wicketkeeper because of the importance of this ﬁelding position. Each team is headed by a captain who is responsible for making tactical decisions such as determining the
batting order, the placement of ﬁelders and the rotation
of bowlers.
A player who excels in both batting and bowling is known
as an allrounder. One who excels as a batsman and
wicketkeeper is known as a “wicketkeeper/batsman”,
sometimes regarded as a type of allrounder. True allrounders are rare as most players focus on either batting
or bowling skills.
2.8 Bowling
Main articles: Bowler (cricket) and Bowling (cricket)
8 2 RULES AND GAMEPLAY
The bowler reaches his delivery stride bymeans of a “runup”, although some bowlers with a very slow delivery take
no more than a couple of steps before bowling. A fast
bowler needs momentum and takes quite a long runup,
running very fast as he does so.
The fastest bowlers can deliver the ball at a speed of over
90 miles per hour (140 km/h) and they sometimes rely on
sheer speed to try and defeat the batsman, who is forced to
react very quickly. Other fast bowlers rely on a mixture
of speed and guile. Some fast bowlers make use of the
seam of the ball so that it “curves” or “swings” in ﬂight.
This type of delivery can deceive a batsman into mistiming his shot so that the ball touches the edge of the bat
and can then be “caught behind” by the wicketkeeper or
a slip ﬁelder.
At the other end of the bowling scale is the “spinner” who
bowls at a relatively slow pace and relies entirely on guile
to deceive the batsman. A spinner will often “buy his
wicket” by “tossing one up” (in a slower, higher parabolic
path) to lure the batsman into making a poor shot. The
batsman has to be very wary of such deliveries as they are
often “ﬂighted” or spun so that the ball will not behave
quite as he expects and he could be “trapped” into getting
himself out.
In between the pacemen and the spinners are the
“medium pacers” who rely on persistent accuracy to try
and contain the rate of scoring and wear down the batsman’s concentration.
All bowlers are classiﬁed according to their looks or style.
The classiﬁcations, as with much cricket terminology, can
be very confusing. Hence, a bowler could be classiﬁed
as LF, meaning he is a left arm fast bowler; or as LBG,
meaning he is a right arm spin bowler who bowls deliveries that are called a "leg break" and a "Googly".
During the bowling action the elbow may be held at any
angle andmay bend further, but may not straighten out. If
the elbow straightens illegally then the squareleg umpire
may call noball: this is known as “throwing” or “chucking”, and can be diﬃcult to detect. The current laws allow
a bowler to straighten his arm 15 degrees or less.
2.9 Fielding
Main articles: Fielding (cricket) and Fielding strategy
(cricket)
All eleven players on the ﬁelding side take the ﬁeld together. One of them is the wicketkeeper aka “keeper”
who operates behind the wicket being defended by the
batsman on strike. Wicketkeeping is normally a specialist occupation and his primary job is to gather deliveries
that the batsman does not hit, so that the batsmen cannot
run byes. He wears special gloves (he is the only ﬁelder
allowed to do so), a box over the groin, and pads to cover
his lower legs. Owing to his position directly behind the
striker, the wicketkeeper has a good chance of getting a
Short
Square
Short
Fly slip
ShortSquare
Third man
Fine leg
Deep
Straight
Fine
Deep
Long
stop Long leg
PointDeep
Deep
Forward
Backward
Deep
cover point
Cover point
Cover
Extra cover
Deep extra cover
(sweeper cover)
Deep
Midoﬀ
Straight
hit
Square
leg
Backward
Backward
short leg
Deep
Wide
Long on
Straight
NS
7
S
9
4 3
2 1
Slips
Leg slip Leg gully
Silly midon
Short
Short
Forward
Gully
Deep
forward
Straight
Bowler
Midwicket
Deep
(sweeper)
WK
R
Long oﬀ
Wide
Silly midoff
U
8
6 5
Midon
Short
Deep
Deep
forward
Deep
backward
Sq L
U
Deep
backward
Silly point
Short leg
(Bat pad)
Oﬀ side On (Leg) side
Cricket: Fielding positions for a righthanded batsman
( )
Mandatory ﬁelders: Bowler and Wicketkeeper (WK)
Traditional primary position of the region
Variations of / additions to the primary position
Umpire (U) and Square Leg Umpire (Sq L U)
Batsmen - Striking (S), Nonstriking (NS), Runner (R)
Approximate regions
30yard circle
Boundary
LEGENDS GLOSSARY
Short: nearer batsman
Silly: very near batsman
Deep: further from batsman
Wide: further from line of pitch
Fine, straight: nearer line of pitch
Square: near(er) line of batsman's crease
Backward: behind batsman's crease
Forward: in front of batsman's crease
Fielding positions in cricket for a righthanded batsman
batsman out caught oﬀ a ﬁne edge from the bat. He is the
only player who can get a batsman out stumped.
Apart from the one currently bowling, the other nine ﬁelders are tactically deployed by the team captain in chosen
positions around the ﬁeld. These positions are not ﬁxed
but they are known by speciﬁc and sometimes colourful names such as “slip”, “third man”, “silly mid on” and
“long leg”. There are always many unprotected areas.
The captain is the most important member of the ﬁelding side as he determines all the tactics including who
should bowl (and how); and he is responsible for “setting
the ﬁeld”, though usually in consultation with the bowler.
In all forms of cricket, if a ﬁelder gets injured or becomes
ill during amatch, a substitute is allowed to ﬁeld instead of
him. The substitute cannot bowl, act as a captain or keep
wicket. The substitute leaves the ﬁeld when the injured
player is ﬁt to return.
2.10 Batting
Main article: batting (cricket)
At any one time, there are two batsmen in the playing
area. One takes station at the striker’s end to defend the
wicket as above and to score runs if possible. His partner,
the nonstriker, is at the end where the bowler is operating.
Batsmen come in to bat in a batting order, decided by the
team captain. The ﬁrst two batsmen – the “openers” –
usually face the hostile bowling from fresh fast bowlers
2.11 Runs 9
English cricketer W.G. Grace “taking guard” in 1883. His pads
and bat are very similar to those used today. The gloves have
evolved somewhat. Many modern players utilise more defensive
equipment than was available to Grace, notably helmets and arm
guards.
with a new ball. The top batting positions are usually
given to the most competent batsmen in the team, and the
team’s bowlers – who are typically, but not always, less
skilled as batsmen – typically bat last. The preannounced
batting order is not mandatory; when a wicket falls any
player who has not yet batted may be sent in next.
If a batsman “retires” (usually due to injury) and cannot
return, he is actually “not out” and his retirement does
not count as a dismissal, though in eﬀect he has been dismissed because his innings is over. Substitute batsmen
are not allowed.
A skilled batsman can use a wide array of “shots” or
“strokes” in both defensive and attacking mode. The idea
is to hit the ball to best eﬀect with the ﬂat surface of the
bat’s blade. If the ball touches the side of the bat it is
called an "edge". Batsmen do not always seek to hit the
ball as hard as possible, and a good player can score runs
just by making a deft stroke with a turn of the wrists or
by simply “blocking” the ball but directing it away from
ﬁelders so that he has time to take a run.
There is a wide variety of shots played in cricket. The
batsman’s repertoire includes strokes named according to
the style of swing and the direction aimed: e.g., "cut",
“drive”, “hook”, “pull”.
An iconic image of Australia’s Victor Trumper stepping out to
drive
A batsman is not required to play a shot; in the event that
he believes the ball will not hit his wicket and there is no
opportunity to score runs, he can “leave” the ball to go
through to the wicketkeeper. Equally, he does not have
to attempt a run when he hits the ball with his bat. He can
deliberately use his leg to block the ball and thereby “pad
it away” but this is risky because of the leg before wicket
rule.
In the event of an injured batsman being ﬁt to bat but not
to run, the umpires and the ﬁelding captain were previously able to allow another member of the batting side to
be a runner. The runner’s only task was to run between
the wickets instead of the incapacitated batsman, and he
was required to wear and carry exactly the same equipment as the batsman. As of 2011 the ICC outlawed the
use of runners as they felt this was being abused.[29]
2.11 Runs
Main article: Run (cricket)
The primary concern of the batsman on strike (i.e., the
“striker”) is to prevent the ball hitting the wicket and secondarily to score runs by hitting the ball with his bat so
that he and his partner have time to run from one end of
the pitch to the other before the ﬁelding side can return
the ball. To register a run, both runners must touch the
ground behind the crease with either their bats or their
bodies (the batsmen carry their bats as they run). Each
completed run increments the score.
More than one run can be scored from a single hit; but,
while hits worth one to three runs are common, the size
of the ﬁeld is such that it is usually diﬃcult to run four or
more. To compensate for this, hits that reach the boundary of the ﬁeld are automatically awarded four runs if the
ball touches the ground en route to the boundary or six
runs if the ball clears the boundary without touching the
ground within the boundary. The batsmen do not need to
run if the ball reaches or crosses the boundary.
10 2 RULES AND GAMEPLAY
Cut
Cov
er d
rive
Oﬀ
d
riv
e
St
ra
igh
t d
riv
e On drive
Pull
HookL
eg
gl
an
ce
Late cut
Square drive
Square cut
The directions in which a righthanded batsman intends to send
the ball when playing various cricketing shots. The diagram for
a lefthanded batsman is a mirror image of this one.
Brian Lara of the West Indies holds the record for highest score
in both Tests and ﬁrstclass cricket.
Hits for ﬁve are unusual and generally rely on the help
of “overthrows” by a ﬁelder returning the ball. If an odd
number of runs is scored by the striker, the two batsmen
have changed ends, and the one who was nonstriker is
now the striker. Only the striker can score individual runs,
but all runs are added to the team’s total.
The decision to attempt a run is ideally made by the batsman who has the better view of the ball’s progress, and
this is communicated by calling: “yes”, “no” and “wait”
are often heard.
Running is a calculated risk because if a ﬁelder breaks the
wicket with the ball while the nearest batsman is out of
his ground (i.e., he does not have part of his body or bat in
contact with the ground behind the popping crease), the
batsman is run out.
A team’s score is reported in terms of the number of runs
scored and the number of batsmen that have been dismissed. For example, if ﬁve batsmen are out and the team
has scored 224 runs, they are said to have scored 224 for
the loss of 5 wickets (commonly shortened to “224 for
ﬁve” and written 224/5 or, in Australia, “ﬁve for 224”
and 5/224).